
The present article deals with effect of Cr addition (10 at.%) on the partitioning behavior and the consequent effect on mechanical properties for tungsten-free γ–γ′ cobalt-based superalloys with base alloy compositions of Co–30Ni–10Al–5Mo–2Ta (2Ta) and Co–30Ni–10Al–5Mo–2Ta–2Ti (2Ta2Ti). Cr addition leads to a change in the morphology of the strengthening cuboidal-shaped γ′ precipitates to a spherical shape. The site preference of Cr atoms in two alloy systems (with and without Ti) has been experimentally investigated using atom probe tomography with the supportive prediction from first principles DFT-based computations. Cr partitions more to the γ matrix relative to γ′. However, Cr also has a strong effect on the Ta and Mo partitioning coefficient across γ/γ′ interfaces. The value of partition coefficient for Mo (KMo) becomes <1 with Cr addition to the alloys. Results from ab initio calculations show that the Cr atoms prefer to replace Mo atoms in the sublattice sites of the L12 unit cell. The solvus temperature of about 1038 and 1078 °C was measured for 10Cr2Ta and 10Cr2Ta2Ti alloy, respectively, and these Cr-containing alloys have very low densities in the range of ~8.4–8.5 gm/cm−3. The 0.2% compressive proof strength of 10Cr2Ta2Ti alloy yields a value of 720 MPa at 870 °C, substantially better than most Co–Al–W-based alloys and many of the nickel-based superalloys (e.g., MAR-M-247).
Production of materials capable of sustaining high temperatures with high strength and hot corrosion resistance will remain a key attraction and challenge for material scientists. These materials are required for fabricating critical parts in hot section of turbine engines (both aero and land based) where the temperature touches 1600 °C .
Recently, addition of Ni to these cobalt-based superalloys has shown to increase the limit of refractory element content as otherwise these are more susceptible to decomposition and unwanted TCP phase formation at high temperatures , reduction of W remains a challenge.
Recent reports on new γ–γ′ cobalt superalloys based on Co–Al–Mo–Nb/Ta system that does not contain W have opened up new possibilities in designing high-temperature alloys with lower densities .
Chromium is integral to the modern superalloys as it imparts good environmental and mechanical properties . The partitioning behaviors of the alloying elements in the γ and γ′ phases in the presence of Cr that were obtained through APT experiments were compared with the results of first principle calculations. To assess the suitability of these alloys for structural application, the preliminary mechanical properties of these chromium-added superalloys were also evaluated.
A laboratory-scale vacuum arc melting unit was used to melt alloys of nominal compositions (as shown in Table 1) under argon atmosphere in the form of 30 grams ingots in a water-cooled copper hearth.
The alloys were melted 10–12 times to obtain homogenized alloy composition throughout the ingot. Subsequently, these were cast into 3-mm rods using a vacuum arc suction casting unit equipped with a water-cooled split copper mold. The composition of the alloys was measured by using WDS detector in a field emission tipped EPMA (JEOL).
The rods were further solutionized at 1300 °C for 15 h under vacuum (10−5 bar) followed by quenching in cold water. Samples were cut from the solutionized rods and were sealed in vacuum quartz tubes for aging treatment. Aging was carried out at 900 °C for 50 h in a box furnace and subsequently furnace cooled.
For the preparation of TEM samples, 3-mm disks from the heat treated samples were cut and mechanically polished to a thickness of ~80 microns. The final samples were prepared by using a twin jet electropolishing unit with a solution of methanol and 5 vol% perchloric acid at −30 °C. A transmission electron microscope (F30, FEI make) equipped with field emission gun and operating at 300 kV was used for microstructural investigation. Accurate measurements of the elemental partitioning across the interface, atom probe tomography (APT) of the aged samples were carried out. The samples for APT investigation were prepared by using a dual-beam focused ion beam instrument (FIB) (FEI NOVA 200). The APT experiments were carried out using a local electrode atom probe (LEAP™ 3000X HR) system in the laser evaporation mode at a temperature of 40 K, with an evaporation rate of 0.5–0.7%, pulse energy of 0.5 nJ and a pulse frequency of 160 kHz. Data analysis was performed using IVAS™ 3.6.8 software.
Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was used to determine the solvus temperature of the aged samples under an argon atmosphere with a heating rate of 10 °C/min. Compression tests to evaluate the 0.2% proof stress of the alloys were performed using a DARTEC hydraulic machine operated with a strain rate of 10−3 s−1. The density of the alloys were measured in accordance with the ASTM standard B311-08 at room temperature, while the volume fraction of γ′ precipitates for the aged alloys were measured using ASTM standard E562-11.Methodology for ab initio calculations The total energy and electronic structures of all the crystal structure were calculated using projector augmented wave method based on spin-polarized density functional theory (DFT). The electron and ion interaction is represented by all-electron projector augmented wave potentials as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) . We have used pseudo-potential with valence configurations 3d74s2, 3d8 4s2, 3s2 3p1, 4d5 5s1, 3d5 4s1, 3s2 3p6 4s2 3d2 and 6s2 5d3, Co, Ni, Al, Mo, Cr, Ti and Ta, respectively. We have considered 48 atoms of 2 × 2 × 3 supercell for our study. Before final SCF calculation, the lattice parameters, as well as the ionic position of ions of each crystal structure, are optimized. The crystal structure was optimized using the conjugate gradient scheme until the forces and total energy are less than ≤10−3 and <10−4 eV/Å, respectively. The electronic wave functions were represented by plane wave basis set with the cutoff energy of 300 eV. Brillouin zone was sampled by \( 5 \times 5 \times 3 \) Monkhorst–Pack (MP)  k-mesh with a smearing width of 0.2 eV. These combinations of k points, smearing width and energy cutoff are provided a good convergence total energy. The formation energy (∆Hf) of compound is calculated using the following formula \( E_{{\text{total}}}^{{\text{pristine}}} \), \( n_{j} \) and \( \mu_{j} \), which are the total energy of the supercell, number of atom of ith species in the supercell and chemical potential of the ith species, respectively. The defect/impurity formation energy is calculated by where, \( E_{{\text{total}}}^{{\text{pristine}}} \), \( E_{{\text{defected}}}^{{\text{total}}} \)\( n_{j} \) and \( \mu_{j} \) are the total energy of the supercell, the total energy of the defected cell, number of atom of ith species in the supercell and chemical potential of the ith species, respectively. The chemical potential µj of ith species is considered the total energy per atom of their most stable phase. Here, the hexagonal close-packed (hcp) structure for Co, face-centered cubic (fcc) structure for Al and Ni and body-centered cubic (bcc) structure for Mo, Ta and Cr are considered as their most stable states. The lattice parameters for a given composition are considered same for all the configurations.
Figure 1a, b shows SEM micrograph using secondary electron mode of Co–30Ni–10Cr–10Al–5Mo–2Ta (10Cr2Ta) and Co–30Ni–10Cr–10Al–5Mo–2Ta–2Ti (10Cr2Ta2Ti) alloys after aging at 900 °C for 50 h. In both the alloys, we observe spherical precipitates with relatively higher volume fraction for Ti-containing alloy. The diffraction patterns along . Hence, with the variation of Cr content in these alloys, the lattice misfit at the γ/γ′ interface can be modulated or controlled. This can play an important role in the coarsening behavior of the γ′ precipitates at high temperatures.
Figure 2 shows APT reconstructions with the γ/γ′ interface for both 10Cr2Ta and 10Cr2Ta2Ti alloys. The green and red atoms belong to Ta and Mo, respectively. Table 2 shows the compositions of γ matrix, γ′ precipitate and the calculated partitioning coefficients of the respective constituent elements for both the aged alloys. For comparison of the values with the alloys that do not contain Cr, the compositions of γ and γ′ for Co–30Ni–10Al–5Mo–2Ta (2Ta) and Co–30Ni–10Al–5Mo–2Ta–2Ti (2Ta2Ti) alloys taken from the Ref.  were also included. The partitioning coefficient (K) is calculated by the formula K = Cγ′/Cγ (where Cγ′ and Cγ are concentration of the element in the ordered γ′ precipitate and matrix γ phase, respectively).
From the measured compositions, it is clear that Cr partitions to γ matrix with respect to the γ′ precipitates with similar partitioning coefficient (KCr) of 0.26 and 0.24 in 10Cr2Ta and 10Cr2Ti2Ti alloys while Al and Ta partition to γ′ precipitates with the respect to γ matrix with partitioning coefficients KAl > 2 and KTa > 9, respectively, in both the alloys. In addition, the Ta partitioning in γ′ with respect to γ is measured to be more in Cr-containing alloys compared to 2Ta and 2Ta2Ti alloys . Similarly in 10Cr2Ta2Ti, Ti strongly partitions to the γ′ precipitate with KTi > 6, and since Co3Ti with L12 crystal structure is a stable phase in binary Co–Ti phase diagram, it can be deduced that Ti will occupy the {0, 0, 0} sublattice positions of the L12 unit cell along with Al, Mo and Ta.
On the other hand, the partitioning coefficient for Mo (KMo) in both the alloys turns out to be <1 due to the addition of Cr. The KMo values for both the alloys are measured to be similar. The alloys (2Ta and 2Ta2Ti) that do not contain Cr show KMo > 1 suggesting that the Cr atoms prefer to replace Mo atoms in the L12 unit cell and occupy those sites. In Co(Ni)–Al–W-based alloys . Similarly, in the present case, we observe Mo segregation on flat γ/γ′ interfaces (100 type facets), while there was no evidence of interfacial Mo segregation in curved interfaces (spherical precipitates in Cr-containing alloys). Hence, it is likely that in addition to the reason of higher misfit across γ/γ′ interface for cuboidal morphology, the Mo segregation at the interface is also an important contributing factor for facetted γ′ precipitates in γ matrix.
An additional and critical observation is that the measured percentage of total content of Co + Ni in γ′ phase is <73% for the both Cr-containing alloys while the values for the alloy that does not contain Cr (2Ta and 2Ta2Ti) are >76%. This indicates that Cr atoms will also prefer to occupy partially the {1/2, 1/2, 0} lattice sites (along with Co and Ni). It can be noted that the site substitution preference of Cr in nickel-based superalloys is also found to be dependent on alloy composition and aging conditions. For example, Booth-Morrison et al.  showed that Cr and Al atoms will occupy {0, 0, 0} sublattice positions in L12 unit cell in the case of Ni–Al–Cr alloy. However, the addition of strong γ′ stabilizers, such as Ta, favors replacing Cr from these sublattice sites and occupy them. They have shown through ab initio calculations that the difference in substitutional energies for Cr in Ni and Al sites is very small and hence Cr has a very weak preference for {0, 0, 0} sublattice positions.
Ab initio calculations were carried out to know the site preference of Cr atoms in the L12 unit cell and compare the results with the experimental findings. The basic stoichiometry of Co3(Al,Mo,Ta) with the composition (37Co–6Al–3Mo–2Ta—48 atom unit cell) close to experimental value  was chosen as the base intermetallic compound in the L12 structure for the first principle calculations. The substitute element will be thermodynamically unfavorable at a site if the impurity formation energy is greater than 1 eV/atom. First, the site preference of Ni in the base unit cell was checked. The calculated impurity formation energy of Ni at different site occupancy is shown in Fig. 3a. The impurity formation energy of Ni in Co site is lowest among the other sites that indicate Ni will strongly prefer to occupy {1/2, 1/2, 0} lattice sites along with Co atoms.
Following this, the site preference of Cr was calculated in the stoichiometry (Co,Ni)3(Al,Mo,Ta) with the following number of atoms Co–20Ni–7Al–3Mo–1Ta (48-atom unit cell) that is close to the measured composition from Ref. . To calculate impurity formation energy for Cr substitution in Ta sites, we have considered 96-atom unit cell by keeping composition same as 48-atom unit cell. The calculated impurity formation energy is shown in Fig. 3b, and it indicates that the Cr will prefer to replace Mo atoms present in the {0, 0, 0} sublattice sites and occupy them. This is consistent with the experimentally observed change in partitioning coefficient of Mo (KMo < 1 from KMo > 1) after the addition of Cr to the alloy.
Similarly, to know the effect of Ti addition (a strong γ′ stabilizer), a unit cell of the stoichiometry (Co,Ni)3(Al,Mo,Ta,Cr) having the number of atoms Co–20Ni–7Al–2Mo–2Cr–1Ta (48-atom unit cell) with the composition close to the experimental value obtained for the precipitate in containing 10Cr2Ta2Ti was assumed. The impurity formation energy for Ti in the unit cell at different positions is shown in Fig. 3c. Ti exhibits similar tendency or preference to replace Mo or Cr present in the {0, 0, 0} sublattice positions. In addition, it is observed experimentally that there is no change in the partitioning coefficient of Mo (KMo) after the addition of Ti. This shows Ti will tend to replace Cr atoms from the {0, 0, 0} sublattice positions and hence Cr has a weak preference for these sites when a strong γ′ stabilizer is introduced into the unit cell.
The site substitution behavior of Cr into the unit cell (Co,Ni)3(Al,Mo,Ta,Ti) is also calculated, and Fig. 3d shows the impurity formation energy for Cr atom at different lattice positions of the unit cell having number of atoms Co–20Ni–7Al–2Mo–2Ti–1Ta (in calculation of impurity formation energy for Cr substitution in Ta sites, we have considered 96-atom unit cell by keeping composition same as 48-atom unit cell). Even in the presence Ti, the Cr prefers to replace Mo atoms present in {0, 0, 0} sublattice sites compared to other atoms.
Figure 4a shows the comparison of solvus temperatures of 10Cr2Ta/10Cr2Ta2Ti alloys with 2Ta/2Ta2Ti alloys, Co–9Al–9.8W alloy and nickel-based WASPALOY . The densities of 10Cr2Ta and 10Cr2Ta2Ti were measured to be 8.51 and 8.41 gm.cm−3, respectively, that are much lower than existing cobalt-based superalloys and are comparable to nickel-based superalloys (Fig. 4b).
As the addition of Cr significantly influences the coherency of the γ/γ′ interface, this is expected to influence the mechanical properties. To obtain a preliminary evaluation of the mechanical properties, compression tests were performed on both the alloys. Figure 5a shows a plot of 0.2% proof stress versus temperature for 10Cr2Ta/10Cr2Ta2Ti alloys and compared with 2Ta/2Ta2Ti alloys, commercially available nickel (MAR-M-247) . Figure 5b shows a comparison of specific 0.2% proof stress values at 870 °C for 10Cr2Ta/10Cr2Ta2Ti alloys with 2Ta/2Ta2Ti alloys, Co–Al–W-based and nickel-based MAR-M-247 alloy. Due to higher density, Co–9Al–9.8W and Co–8.8Al–9.8W–2Ta alloys have lower values of 32.6 and 57.4 MPa/gm.cm−3, respectively. The present alloys, 10Cr2Ta and 10Cr2Ta2Ti, show 73.4 and 85.6 MPa/gm.cm−3, respectively, that are even higher than nickel-based superalloys.
The main conclusions from the present article are: Cr additions alter the cuboidal morphology of γ′ precipitates in Co–30Ni–10Al–5Mo–2Ta and Co–30Ni–10Al–5Mo–2Ta–2Ti, i.e., the precipitates tend to adopt spherical morphology.
With the addition of Cr, the Mo partitioning, i.e., KMo, becomes <1. Ab initio calculations indicate that the Cr prefers to replace Mo atoms of the L12 unit cell, consequently altering the nature of partitioning of Mo (KMo > 1 to KMo < 1).
The solvus temperature of the 10Cr2Ta and 10Cr2Ta2Ti alloys was measured to be 1038 and 1078 °C, respectively. The measured densities of these Cr-containing alloys are in the range between 8.41 and 8.52 gm.cm−3 that is much lower than Co–Al–W-based alloys and comparable to typical nickel-based superalloys.
The 10Cr2Ta2Ti alloy exhibits a 0.2% proof stress of 720 MPa at 870 °C which is significantly higher than other Co–Al–W-based alloys and even nickel-based superalloys. In addition, due to their lower density, these alloys show higher specific strength.